docs_src/tutorials/prefix_scan.md, before:

# DSLX Tutorial: `enumerate` and `match` expressions

In this document we explain in detail the implementation of a 8 byte prefix scan
computation. In order to understand the implementation, it is useful to
understand the intended functionality first.

For a given input of 8 bytes, the scan iterates from left to right over the
input and produces an output of the same size. Each element in the output
contains the count of duplicate values seen so far in the input. The counter
resets to 0 if a new value is found.

For example, for this input:

```dslx-snippet
  let input = u32[8]:[0, ...]
```

the code should produce this output:

```dslx-snippet
  u3[8]:[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
```

At index 0 it has not yet found any value, so it assigns a counter value of `0`.

At index 1 it finds the second occurrence of the value '0' (which is the 1st
duplicate) and therefore adds a 1 to the counter from index 0.

At index 2 it finds the third occurrence of the value '0' (which is the 2nd
duplicate) and therefore adds a 1 to the counter from index 1. And so on.

Correspondingly, for this input:

```dslx-snippet
  let input = u32[8]:[0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3]
```

it should produce:

```dslx-snippet
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1])
```

The full listing is in `examples/dslx_intro/prefix_scan_equality.x`.

### Function `prefix_scan_eq`

The implementation displays a few interesting language features.

The function prototype is straight-forward. Input is an array of 8 values of type
`u32`. Output is an array of size 8 holding 3-bit values (the maximum resulting
count can only be 7, which fits in 3 bits).

```dslx-snippet
fn prefix_scan_eq(x: u32[8]) -> u3[8] {
```

The first let expression produces a tuple of 3 values. It only cares about the
last value `result`, so it stubs out the other two elements via the 'ignore'
placeholder `_`.

```dslx-snippet
  let (_, _, result) =
```

Why a 3-Tuple? Because he following loop has tuple of three values as the
accumulator. The return type of the loop is the type of the accumulator, so
above let needs to be of the same type.

#### Enumerated Loop

Using tuples as the accumulator is a convenient way to model multiple
loop-carried values:

```dslx-snippet
    for ((i, elem), (prior, count, result)): ((u32, u32), (u32, u3, u3[8]))
          in enumerate(x) {
```

The iterable of this loop is `enumerate(x)`. On each iteration, this construct
delivers a tuple consisting of current index and current element. This is
represented as the tuple `(i, elem)` in the `for` construct.

The loop next specifies the accumulator, which is a 3-tuple consisting of the
values named `prior`, `count`, and `result`.

The types of the iterable and accumulator are specified next. The iterable is a
tuple consisting of two `u32` values. The accumulator is more interesting, it is
a tuple consisting of a `u32` value (`prior`), a `u3` value (`count`), and an
array type `u3[8]`, which is an array holding 8 elements of bit-width 3. This is
the type of `result` in the accumulator.

Looping back to the prior `let` statement, it ignores the `prior` and `count`
members of the tuple and will only return the `result` part.

#### A Match Expression

The next expression is an interesting `match` expression. The let expression
binds the tuple `(to_place, new_count): (u3, u3)` to the result of the following
match expression:

```dslx-snippet
let (to_place, new_count): (u3, u3) = match (i == u32:0, prior == elem) {
```

`to_place` will hold the value that is to be written at a given index.
`new_count` will contain the updated counter value.

The `match` expression evaluates two conditions in parallel:

*   is `i` == 0?
*   is the `prior` element the same as the current `elem`

Two tests mean there are four possible cases, which are all handled in the
following four cases:

```dslx-snippet
      // i == 0 (no matter whether prior == elem or not):
      //    we set position 0 to 0 and update the new_counter to 1
      (true, true) => (u3:0, u3:1),
      (true, false) => (u3:0, u3:1),

      // if i != 0 - if the current element is the same as pior,
      //    set to_place to the value of the current count
      //    update new_counter with the increased counter value
      (false, true) => (count, count + u3:1),

      // if i != 0 - if current element is different from prior,
      //     set to_place back to 0
      //     set new_counter back to 1
      (false, false) => (u3:0, u3:1),
    };
```

To update the result, we set index `i` in the `result` array to the value
`to_place` via the built-in `update` function, which produces a new value
`new_result`):

```dslx-snippet
    let new_result: u3[8] = update(result, i, to_place);
```

Finally the updated accumulator value is constructed, it is the last expression
in the loop:

```dslx-snippet
    (elem, new_count, new_result)
```

Following the loop body, as an argument to the loop, we initialize the
accumulator in the following way.

*   set element `prior` to -1, in order to not match any other value.
*   set element `count` to 0.
*   set element `result` to 8 0's of size `u3`. (Note that the `...` syntax
    is short for "fill in the rest of the elements with the last value
    specified".)

```dslx-snippet
}((u32:-1, u3:0, u3[8]:[0, ...]));
```

And, finally, the function simply returns `result`:

```dslx-snippet
  result
}
```

### Testing

To test the two cases we've described above, we add the following two test cases
right to this implementation file:

```dslx-snippet
#[test]
fn test_prefix_scan_eq_all_zero() {
  let input = u32[8]:[0, ...];
  let result = prefix_scan_eq(input);
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
}

#[test]
fn test_prefix_scan_eq_doubles() {
  let input = u32[8]:[0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3];
  let result = prefix_scan_eq(input);
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1])
}
```

To run tests against the file present in the repository:

```console
xls$ bazel run -c opt //xls/dslx:interpreter_main -- \
       $PWD/xls/examples/dslx_intro/prefix_scan_equality.x \
       --compare=none
[ RUN UNITTEST  ] prefix_scan_eq_all_zero_test
[            OK ]
[ RUN UNITTEST  ] prefix_scan_eq_doubles_test
[            OK ]
[===============] 2 test(s) ran; 0 failed; 0 skipped.
```

(Note that `--compare=none` is currently required because `enumerate` ranges are
not currently convertable to IR, otherwise running the DSLX interpreter would do
implicit comparison to IR interpreter -- see
[google/xls#164](https://github.com/google/xls/issues/164).)

Commit message:

Further clean up XLS tutorials.
* Fix a few Markdown rendering issues.
* Fix the crc32 walkthrough going out of sync with the implementation and add some explanation for the unused variable.
* Move explanation for an ellipsis in array construction further up to first use.

PiperOrigin-RevId: 638824553

docs_src/tutorials/prefix_scan.md, after:

# DSLX Tutorial: `enumerate` and `match` expressions

In this document we explain in detail the implementation of a 8 byte prefix scan
computation. In order to understand the implementation, it is useful to
understand the intended functionality first.

For a given input of 8 bytes, the scan iterates from left to right over the
input and produces an output of the same size. Each element in the output
contains the count of duplicate values seen so far in the input. The counter
resets to 0 if a new value is found.

For example, suppose we have this input:

```dslx-snippet
  let input = u32[8]:[0, ...]
```

This creates an 8-element
[array](../dslx_reference.md#array-type) of `u32`
integers; the `...` at the end of the array is a shorthand to indicate
"fill in the rest of the elements with the last value specified".

The prefix scan code should produce this output:

```dslx-snippet
  u3[8]:[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
```

At index 0 it has not yet found any value, so it assigns a counter value of `0`.

At index 1 it finds the second occurrence of the value '0' (which is the 1st
duplicate) and therefore adds a 1 to the counter from index 0.

At index 2 it finds the third occurrence of the value '0' (which is the 2nd
duplicate) and therefore adds a 1 to the counter from index 1. And so on.

Correspondingly, for this input:

```dslx-snippet
  let input = u32[8]:[0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3]
```

it should produce:

```dslx-snippet
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1])
```

The full listing is in
[examples/dslx_intro/prefix_scan_equality.x](https://github.com/google/xls/tree/main/xls/examples/dslx_intro/prefix_scan_equality.x).

### Function `prefix_scan_eq`

The implementation displays a few interesting language features.

The function prototype is straight-forward. Input is an array of 8 values of type
`u32`. Output is an array of size 8 holding 3-bit values (the maximum resulting
count can only be 7, which fits in 3 bits).

```dslx-snippet
fn prefix_scan_eq(x: u32[8]) -> u3[8] {
```

The first let expression produces a tuple of 3 values. It only cares about the
last value `result`, so it stubs out the other two elements via the 'unused'
placeholder `_`.

```dslx-snippet
  let (_, _, result) =
```

Why a 3-Tuple? Because the subsequent loop on the right hand side of this
assignment has a tuple of three values as the accumulator. The return type of
the loop is the type of the accumulator, so the above let needs to be of the
same type.

#### Enumerated Loop

Using tuples as the accumulator is a convenient way to model multiple
loop-carried values:

```dslx-snippet
    for ((i, elem), (prior, count, result)): ((u32, u32), (u32, u3, u3[8]))
          in enumerate(x) {
```

The iterable of this loop is `enumerate(x)`. On each iteration, this construct
delivers a tuple consisting of current index and current element. This is
represented as the tuple `(i, elem)` in the `for` construct.

The loop next specifies the accumulator, which is a 3-tuple consisting of the
values named `prior`, `count`, and `result`.

The types of the iterable and accumulator are specified next. The iterable is a
tuple consisting of two `u32` values. The accumulator is more interesting, it is
a tuple consisting of a `u32` value (`prior`), a `u3` value (`count`), and an
array type `u3[8]`, which is an array holding 8 elements of bit-width 3. This is
the type of `result` in the accumulator.

Looping back to the prior `let` statement, it ignores the `prior` and `count`
members of the tuple and will only store the `result` part.

#### A Match Expression

The next expression is an interesting `match` expression. The let expression
binds the tuple `(to_place, new_count): (u3, u3)` to the result of the following
match expression:

```dslx-snippet
let (to_place, new_count): (u3, u3) = match (i == u32:0, prior == elem) {
```

`to_place` will hold the value that is to be written at a given index.
`new_count` will contain the updated counter value.

The `match` expression evaluates two conditions in parallel:

*   is `i` == 0?
*   is the `prior` element the same as the current `elem`

Two tests mean there are four possible cases, which are all handled in the
following four cases:

```dslx-snippet
      // i == 0 (no matter whether prior == elem or not):
      //    we set position 0 to 0 and update the new_counter to 1
      (true, true) => (u3:0, u3:1),
      (true, false) => (u3:0, u3:1),

      // if i != 0 - if the current element is the same as pior,
      //    set to_place to the value of the current count
      //    update new_counter with the increased counter value
      (false, true) => (count, count + u3:1),

      // if i != 0 - if current element is different from prior,
      //     set to_place back to 0
      //     set new_counter back to 1
      (false, false) => (u3:0, u3:1),
    };
```

To update the result, we set index `i` in the `result` array to the value
`to_place` via the built-in `update` function, which produces a new value
`new_result`):

```dslx-snippet
    let new_result: u3[8] = update(result, i, to_place);
```

Finally the updated accumulator value is constructed, it is the last expression
in the loop:

```dslx-snippet
    (elem, new_count, new_result)
```

Following the loop body, as an argument to the loop, we initialize the
accumulator in the following way.

*   set element `prior` to -1, in order to not match any other value.
*   set element `count` to 0.
*   set element `result` to 8 0's of size `u3`.

```dslx-snippet
}((u32:-1, u3:0, u3[8]:[0, ...]));
```

And, finally, the function simply returns `result`:

```dslx-snippet
  result
}
```

### Testing

To test the two cases we've described above, we add the following two test cases
right to this implementation file:

```dslx-snippet
#[test]
fn test_prefix_scan_eq_all_zero() {
  let input = u32[8]:[0, ...];
  let result = prefix_scan_eq(input);
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7])
}

#[test]
fn test_prefix_scan_eq_doubles() {
  let input = u32[8]:[0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3];
  let result = prefix_scan_eq(input);
  assert_eq(result, u3[8]:[0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1])
}
```

To run tests against the file present in the repository:

```console
xls$ bazel run -c opt //xls/dslx:interpreter_main -- \
       $PWD/xls/examples/dslx_intro/prefix_scan_equality.x \
       --compare=none
[ RUN UNITTEST  ] prefix_scan_eq_all_zero_test
[            OK ]
[ RUN UNITTEST  ] prefix_scan_eq_doubles_test
[            OK ]
[===============] 2 test(s) ran; 0 failed; 0 skipped.
```

(Note that `--compare=none` is currently required because `enumerate` ranges are
not currently convertable to IR, otherwise running the DSLX interpreter would do
implicit comparison to IR interpreter -- see
[google/xls#164](https://github.com/google/xls/issues/164).)
