CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# How to Contribute

We'd love to accept your patches and contributions to XLS. We recommend filing
an issue for back-and-forth discussion on implementation strategy before sending
a PR. Also, note the community guidelines below.

## Community Guidelines

This project follows
[Google's Open Source Community Guidelines](https://opensource.google/conduct/).

## Contributor License Agreement

Contributions to this project must be accompanied by a Contributor License
Agreement (CLA). You (or your employer) retain the copyright to your
contribution; this simply gives us permission to use and redistribute your
contributions as part of the project. Head over to
<https://cla.developers.google.com/> to see your current agreements on file or
to sign a new one.

You generally only need to submit a CLA once, so if you've already submitted one
(even if it was for a different project), you probably don't need to do it
again.

## Code style

When writing code contributions to the project, please make sure to follow the
style guides: The
[Google C++ Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html) and
the
[Google Python Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html).
There are a few small
[XLS clarifications](https://google.github.io/xls/xls_style/) for local style on
this project where the style guide is ambiguous.

## Code reviews

All submissions, including submissions by project members, require review. We
use GitHub pull requests for this purpose. Consult
[GitHub Help](https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/) for more
information on using pull requests.

### Pull Request Style

We ask contributors to squash all the commits in the PR into a single one, in
order to have a cleaner revision history.

Specifically, when you initially send a PR, please ensure it has a single
commit. **If** you'd like to address review comments by *adding*
commits,[^why-add] please be sure to squash them into one again once the PR is
approved (though squashing continuously is also acceptable).

Generally, squashing to a single commit can be accomplished by:

```console
proj/xls$ # Here we assume origin points to google/xls.
proj/xls$ git fetch origin main
proj/xls$ git merge-base origin/main my-branch-name  # Tells you common ancesor COMMIT_HASH.
proj/xls$ git reset --soft $COMMIT_HASH
proj/xls$ git commit -a -m "My awesome squashed commit message!!!1"
proj/xls$ # Now we can more easily rebase our squashed commit on main.
proj/xls$ git rebase origin/main
```

Rebased branches can be pushed to their corresponding PRs with `--force`.

See also
[this Stack Overflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17354353/git-squash-all-commits-in-branch-without-conflicting).

### Documenting PPA Impact

We've noted that both open-source and commercial tools have non-negligible noise
when it comes to measuring PPA changes; even reordering lines of Verilog, or
changing the names of variables, can have substantial impact. The following
procedure empirically seems to produce results with at most 2% noise in area and
at most 10% noise in estimated delay.

When contributing a change intended to improve timing or area, or when filing an
issue about PPA, please:

1.  Both before and after your change, run your circuit through Yosys synthesis
    targeting ASAP7 with at least 50 different seeds. Your seed should involve
    passing 50 different values for the flags `--autoidx` and `--hash-seed`.
    -   If you are using `bazel_rules_hdl`, you may pass these values using the
        `"autoidx_seed"` and `"hash_seed"` parameters on the `synthesize_rtl`
        build rule.
1.  Report the **best** area of the 50 different values both before & after your
    change.

If the difference is less than 2% in area or less than 10% in delay, please be
prepared to work with us to verify that your change is a net improvement!

Alternatively, if you're using a commercial tool, we ask that you similarly run
at least 10 seeds using whatever mechanism your tool supports for seeded runs.
Please confirm that you are getting different results each time, and - if at all
possible - try to make sure you've captured about 90% of the variability of your
tool. (You can do this by running a large number of seeds the first time you try
this, and checking how many data points you would have needed to cover the 5% to
95% range.)

If your tool does not support seeded runs, XLS's `codegen_main` supports a
`--randomize_order_seed` flag, which randomizes the order of the resulting lines
of Verilog while respecting topological order and other reasonable constraints.
The resulting Verilog is trivially equivalent for all seed values, but (for most
tools) will produce results of varying quality. Run as many different seeds
through codegen & your synthesis tool as you would seeded runs.

## Rendering Documentation

XLS uses [mkdocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) to render its documentation, and
serves it via GitHub pages at <https://google.github.io/xls>. To render
documentation locally as a preview, you can set up mkdocs as follows:

```console
proj/xls$ mkvirtualenv xls-mkdocs-env
proj/xls$ pip install mkdocs-material mkdocs-exclude mdx_truly_sane_lists mkdocs-print-site-plugin
proj/xls$ mkdocs serve
```

This will start a local server that you can browse to and that will update the
documentation on the fly as you make changes.

Note that the `mkvirtualenv` command assumes you're using
[virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)
to manage your Python environment. You'll need to adjust these instructions if
you're doing something different. That can include explicitly adding `mkdocs` to
your path, if locally installed Python binaries aren't available by default.

### Formatting documentation

Markdown files should be formatted using
[mdformat](https://github.com/hukkin/mdformat). Install mdformat with the
appropriate extensions as follows:

```console
proj/xls$ mkvirtualenv xls-mdformat-env
proj/xls$ pip install mdformat mdformat-tables mdformat-footnote
```

The file `.mdformat.toml` in the top source directory contains the mdformat
configuration settings.

### DSLX snippets in documentation

There are a few different language annotations we use in different circumstances
in the Markdown docs:

-   `dslx`: A full code block that should be parsed/typechecked/tested.
-   `dslx-snippet`: A fragment that should be syntax highlighted, but not
    parsed/typechecked/tested.
-   `dslx-bad`: An example of something that we expect to produce an error when
    parsing/typechecking/testing.

GitHub issue [google/xls#378](https://github.com/google/xls/issues/378) tracks a
script that does the parse/typecheck/test that ensures our documentation is up
to date and correct.

### GitHub Issue "T-Shirt Size" Estimate Labels

We attempt to employ some lightweight processes for task size estimation for the
GitHub issues in the XLS repository, as a way of making tasks available that fit
for available development time as well as gut checking, if something takes
longer than we expected, why and can we do things to mitigate the surprising
amount of time required going forward.

There's a practice of marking issues with "t-shirt sizes" for development tasks.
An issue can be XS, S, M, L, XL, these are given in the
["estimate" labels](https://github.com/google/xls/labels?q=estimate):

Name        | Abbreviation | Time Scale
:---------: | :----------: | :---------:
eXtra Small | XS           | ~few hours
Small       | S            | ~a day
Medium      | M            | ~1-3 days
Large       | L            | ~a week
eXtra Large | XL           | ~multi-week

These are not "load bearing", just to note expectation. Generally the assumption
is "time expected for a person familiar with this matter / part of the code
base", so developers that would ramp on an issue would require more time than is
indicated by the label. Feel free to change the label at will, ideally by
providing a helpful explanation for why/how the estimate came to change.

[^why-add]: Adding commits preserves the GitHub code review history and makes it
    easier to review incremental changes, but causes an additional
    "round trip" with the reviewer for the final squash after approval,
    so there is a small procedural tradeoff.

Commit message:

Clarify process for proposing style guide clarifications.
Add a note to the CONTRIBUTING.md file explaining that style guide clarifications should be proposed via Issues or Discussions, not through direct Pull Requests.

PiperOrigin-RevId: 794122220

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# How to Contribute

We'd love to accept your patches and contributions to XLS. We recommend filing
an issue for back-and-forth discussion on implementation strategy before sending
a PR. Also, note the community guidelines below.

## Community Guidelines

This project follows
[Google's Open Source Community Guidelines](https://opensource.google/conduct/).

## Contributor License Agreement

Contributions to this project must be accompanied by a Contributor License
Agreement (CLA). You (or your employer) retain the copyright to your
contribution; this simply gives us permission to use and redistribute your
contributions as part of the project. Head over to
<https://cla.developers.google.com/> to see your current agreements on file or
to sign a new one.

You generally only need to submit a CLA once, so if you've already submitted one
(even if it was for a different project), you probably don't need to do it
again.

## Code style

When writing code contributions to the project, please make sure to follow the
style guides: The
[Google C++ Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html) and
the
[Google Python Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html).
There are a few small
[XLS clarifications](https://google.github.io/xls/xls_style/) for local style on
this project where the style guide is ambiguous.

If you would like to propose additional clarifications, please open an Issue or
Discussion; broad PRs that amount to de-facto style changes without a decision
on the accompanying Issue or Discussion will be closed.

## Code reviews

All submissions, including submissions by project members, require review. We
use GitHub pull requests for this purpose. Consult
[GitHub Help](https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/) for more
information on using pull requests.

### Pull Request Style

We ask contributors to squash all the commits in the PR into a single one, in
order to have a cleaner revision history.

Specifically, when you initially send a PR, please ensure it has a single
commit. **If** you'd like to address review comments by *adding*
commits,[^why-add] please be sure to squash them into one again once the PR is
approved (though squashing continuously is also acceptable).

Generally, squashing to a single commit can be accomplished by:

```console
proj/xls$ # Here we assume origin points to google/xls.
proj/xls$ git fetch origin main
proj/xls$ git merge-base origin/main my-branch-name  # Tells you common ancesor COMMIT_HASH.
proj/xls$ git reset --soft $COMMIT_HASH
proj/xls$ git commit -a -m "My awesome squashed commit message!!!1"
proj/xls$ # Now we can more easily rebase our squashed commit on main.
proj/xls$ git rebase origin/main
```

Rebased branches can be pushed to their corresponding PRs with `--force`.

See also
[this Stack Overflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17354353/git-squash-all-commits-in-branch-without-conflicting).

### Documenting PPA Impact

We've noted that both open-source and commercial tools have non-negligible noise
when it comes to measuring PPA changes; even reordering lines of Verilog, or
changing the names of variables, can have substantial impact. The following
procedure empirically seems to produce results with at most 2% noise in area and
at most 10% noise in estimated delay.

When contributing a change intended to improve timing or area, or when filing an
issue about PPA, please:

1.  Both before and after your change, run your circuit through Yosys synthesis
    targeting ASAP7 with at least 50 different seeds. Your seed should involve
    passing 50 different values for the flags `--autoidx` and `--hash-seed`.
    -   If you are using `bazel_rules_hdl`, you may pass these values using the
        `"autoidx_seed"` and `"hash_seed"` parameters on the `synthesize_rtl`
        build rule.
1.  Report the **best** area of the 50 different values both before & after your
    change.

If the difference is less than 2% in area or less than 10% in delay, please be
prepared to work with us to verify that your change is a net improvement!

Alternatively, if you're using a commercial tool, we ask that you similarly run
at least 10 seeds using whatever mechanism your tool supports for seeded runs.
Please confirm that you are getting different results each time, and - if at all
possible - try to make sure you've captured about 90% of the variability of your
tool. (You can do this by running a large number of seeds the first time you try
this, and checking how many data points you would have needed to cover the 5% to
95% range.)

If your tool does not support seeded runs, XLS's `codegen_main` supports a
`--randomize_order_seed` flag, which randomizes the order of the resulting lines
of Verilog while respecting topological order and other reasonable constraints.
The resulting Verilog is trivially equivalent for all seed values, but (for most
tools) will produce results of varying quality. Run as many different seeds
through codegen & your synthesis tool as you would seeded runs.

## Rendering Documentation

XLS uses [mkdocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) to render its documentation, and
serves it via GitHub pages at <https://google.github.io/xls>. To render
documentation locally as a preview, you can set up mkdocs as follows:

```console
proj/xls$ mkvirtualenv xls-mkdocs-env
proj/xls$ pip install mkdocs-material mkdocs-exclude mdx_truly_sane_lists mkdocs-print-site-plugin
proj/xls$ mkdocs serve
```

This will start a local server that you can browse to and that will update the
documentation on the fly as you make changes.

Note that the `mkvirtualenv` command assumes you're using
[virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)
to manage your Python environment. You'll need to adjust these instructions if
you're doing something different. That can include explicitly adding `mkdocs` to
your path, if locally installed Python binaries aren't available by default.

### Formatting documentation

Markdown files should be formatted using
[mdformat](https://github.com/hukkin/mdformat). Install mdformat with the
appropriate extensions as follows:

```console
proj/xls$ mkvirtualenv xls-mdformat-env
proj/xls$ pip install mdformat mdformat-tables mdformat-footnote
```

The file `.mdformat.toml` in the top source directory contains the mdformat
configuration settings.

### DSLX snippets in documentation

There are a few different language annotations we use in different circumstances
in the Markdown docs:

-   `dslx`: A full code block that should be parsed/typechecked/tested.
-   `dslx-snippet`: A fragment that should be syntax highlighted, but not
    parsed/typechecked/tested.
-   `dslx-bad`: An example of something that we expect to produce an error when
    parsing/typechecking/testing.

GitHub issue [google/xls#378](https://github.com/google/xls/issues/378) tracks a
script that does the parse/typecheck/test that ensures our documentation is up
to date and correct.

### GitHub Issue "T-Shirt Size" Estimate Labels

We attempt to employ some lightweight processes for task size estimation for the
GitHub issues in the XLS repository, as a way of making tasks available that fit
for available development time as well as gut checking, if something takes
longer than we expected, why and can we do things to mitigate the surprising
amount of time required going forward.

There's a practice of marking issues with "t-shirt sizes" for development tasks.
An issue can be XS, S, M, L, XL, these are given in the
["estimate" labels](https://github.com/google/xls/labels?q=estimate):

Name        | Abbreviation | Time Scale
:---------: | :----------: | :---------:
eXtra Small | XS           | ~few hours
Small       | S            | ~a day
Medium      | M            | ~1-3 days
Large       | L            | ~a week
eXtra Large | XL           | ~multi-week

These are not "load bearing", just to note expectation. Generally the assumption
is "time expected for a person familiar with this matter / part of the code
base", so developers that would ramp on an issue would require more time than is
indicated by the label. Feel free to change the label at will, ideally by
providing a helpful explanation for why/how the estimate came to change.

[^why-add]: Adding commits preserves the GitHub code review history and makes it
    easier to review incremental changes, but causes an additional
    "round trip" with the reviewer for the final squash after approval,
    so there is a small procedural tradeoff.
