<!-- Generated file. Do not edit. -->
<!-- To regenerate build `//xls/dev_tools/dev_passes:rebuild_documentation` -->
# Development Optimization Passes List

<!-- Don't bother formatting this. -->
<!-- mdformat global-off -->

This is an automatically generated list of all internal xls developtment
optimization passes available with the default `opt_main`. Normal optimization
passes may be found
[here](https://google.github.io/xls/passes_list/).
This is generated automatically based on comments in the header files.

Warning: These passes are mostly intended for debugging and development use
cases by the XLS development team and allow for the manipulation of ir files in
ways that may not be desirable for general optimization use.

If the opt level is set below 'Min opt level' the pass will act as a no-op.

If the opt level is set above 'Cap opt level' the pass (or passes within the
compound pass) will be executed with the opt level capped to the specified
value.

Warning: Many of these passes have descriptions generated by the Gemini LLM and
may not accurately reflect the behavior of the passes. As time goes on manual
verification or editing of the pass descriptions may be done to improve
accuracy.


## assert_and_cover_removal - Assert and cover removal {#assert_and_cover_removal}



[Header](http://github.com/google/xls/tree/main/xls/dev_tools/dev_passes/remove_assert_and_cover_pass.h)






## literalize_zero_bits - Literalize zero bits {#literalize_zero_bits}



[Header](http://github.com/google/xls/tree/main/xls/dev_tools/dev_passes/literalize_zero_bits_pass.h)






## proc_state_legalization_shim - Proc State Legalization Pass {#proc_state_legalization_shim}


Compatibility shim to use the scheduling pass 'ProcStateLegalizationPass' in
the optimization pass pipeline for modernizing procs.


[Header](http://github.com/google/xls/tree/main/xls/dev_tools/dev_passes/proc_state_legalization_pass_shim.h)






## to_zero_ext - DebugPass: To ZeroExt Pass {#to_zero_ext}


Converts any canonicalized zero-exts back from concat(zero, ...) to zero_ext
since it generally makes for easier to read/visualize graphs. This pass
is not meant to be used as an optimization pass at all.


[Header](http://github.com/google/xls/tree/main/xls/dev_tools/dev_passes/to_zero_ext_pass.h)





