docs_src/ir_to_cytoscape.md, before:

# Cytoscape IR Export

For IRs which are too large to render using the
[ir_viz web app](ir_visualization.md) one may use
[cytoscape](https://cytoscape.org) as a graph viewer. This is a much more manual
experience than the web app but can handle IRs of arbitrary size.

Consult the
[Cytoscape user manual](https://manual.cytoscape.org/en/stable/Introduction.html)
for information on how to use cytoscape.

## Generating the Cytoscape Data

To convert the IR into a form cytoscape can understand run:

```shell
bazel run //xls/visualization/ir_viz:ir_to_cytoscape -- --delay_model=unit --output=/path/to/output.json /path/to/design.ir
```

## Loading Cytoscape

Follow the general directions at
[cytoscape.org to import a network file](https://manual.cytoscape.org/en/stable/Creating_Networks.html#import-fixed-format-network-files).
Note that by default all nodes will be placed on top of one another so you need
to use the `Layout` menu to make cytoscape place all the nodes. Use the `Styles`
tab to adjust how the graph is displayed. A basic style can be found
[here](https://github.com/google/xls/raw/main/docs_src/cytoscape-ir-style.xml).

Commit message:

[ir_viz] Improve visualization, especially for scheduled designs
- Fix the off-by-one error in location line number references
- Add --schedule_path to ir_to_proto and its Python wrapper.
- The resulting critical paths are analyzed for each stage of the schedule, rather than for the entire function (which is the case if no schedule is provided).
- A node now stores the delay of the corresponding path on the critical path.
- Add --target_entity flag to specify one particular entity to be visualized (a specific function or process)

Also updates the example style & instructions for working with Cytoscape.

PiperOrigin-RevId: 788952130

docs_src/ir_to_cytoscape.md, after:

# Cytoscape IR Export

For IRs which are too large to render using the
[ir_viz web app](ir_visualization.md) one may use
[cytoscape](https://cytoscape.org) as a graph viewer. This is a much more manual
experience than the web app but can handle IRs of arbitrary size.

Consult the
[Cytoscape user manual](https://manual.cytoscape.org/en/stable/Introduction.html)
for information on how to use cytoscape.

## Generating the Cytoscape Data

To convert the IR into a form cytoscape can understand run:

```shell
bazel run //xls/visualization/ir_viz:ir_to_cytoscape -- --delay_model=unit --output=/path/to/output.json /path/to/design.ir
```

## Loading Cytoscape

Follow the general directions at
[cytoscape.org to import a network file](https://manual.cytoscape.org/en/stable/Creating_Networks.html#import-fixed-format-network-files).
Note that by default all nodes will be placed on top of one another so you need
to use the `Layout` menu to make cytoscape place all the nodes.

!!! NOTE
    We've found that the "yFiles Hierarchical Layout" works best for most
    designs. This requires installing the
    ["yFiles Layout Algorithms"](https://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/yfileslayoutalgorithms),
    which can be found in Cytoscape's integrated app store.

Use the `Styles` tab to adjust how the graph is displayed. A basic style can be
found
[here](https://github.com/google/xls/raw/main/docs_src/cytoscape-ir-style.xml).
For optimal results, after loading a network, right-click on the style's `Width`
entry and choose `Mapping Value Generators > Fit label width`.
