# Tree Topology Types

## Overview <a id="tree"></a>

The tree topology is a hierarchical topology with a root node and children
nodes. The radix of a node defines the number of children nodes for the given
node. The nodes represent the router nodes and endpoint nodes of a network. A
tree topology has endpoints connected to the root router and leaf routers. It is
called a tree topology because the router nodes form a tree data structure.

![drawing](./noc/tree_topology.png)

**Figure Tree_Topology_Example<a id="tree_topology_example"></a>. A tree
topology example.**

Figure [Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example) shows an example of a
tree topology. In the figure, there are nine nodes: three router nodes and six
endpoint nodes. Router 1 is a root router, and routers 2 and 5 are leaf routers.
Router 1 has a radix of four, and routers 2 and 5 have a radix of two. Routers 2
and 5 are child routers of router 1. Endpoints 3 and 4 are child endpoints of
router 1. Endpoints 6 and 7, and endpoints 8 and 9 are child endpoints of router
2 and router 5 respectively.

## Unidirectional Types <a id="unidirectional_tree"></a>

A unidirectional tree is a tree topology where the communication flow is
unidirectional, thus all channels in the tree are unidirectional. There are two
unidirectional tree types: aggregation tree and distribution tree.

### Aggregation Tree <a id="aggregation_tree"></a>

In the aggregation tree, the communication flow is from the leaf routers of the
tree to the root router of the tree. The endpoints connected to the root router
receive from the network, and the endpoints connected to the leaf routers send
to the network.

![drawing](./noc/aggregation_tree.png)

**Figure
Aggregation_Tree_Topology_Example<a id="aggregation_tree_topology_example"></a>.
The aggregation tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example).**

Figure [Aggregation_Tree_Topology_Example](#aggregation_tree_topology_example)
shows the aggregation tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example). Endpoints 6, 7, 8 and 9 send to
the network, and endpoints 3 and 4 receive from the network.

### Distribution Tree <a id="distribution_tree"></a>

In the distribution tree, the communication flow is from the root router of the
tree to the leaf routers of the tree. The endpoints connected to the root router
send to the network, and the endpoints connected to the leaf routers receive
from the network.

![drawing](./noc/distribution_tree.png)

**Figure
Distribution_Tree_Topology_Example<a id="distribution_tree_topology_example"></a>.
The distribution tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example).**

Figure [Distribution_Tree_Topology_Example](#distribution_tree_topology_example)
shows the distribution tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example). Endpoints 3 and 4 send to the
network, and endpoints 6, 7, 8 and 9 receive from the network.

## Bidirectional Type <a id="bidirectional_tree"></a>

A bidirectional tree is a tree topology where the communication flow is
bidirectional. The communication flows: from the root router of the tree to the
leaf routers of the tree <span style="text-decoration:underline;">and</span>
from the leaf routers of the tree to the root router of the tree. By definition,
a bidirectional tree requires: 1) at least one endpoint connected to the root
router that sends to the network, 2) at least one endpoint connected to the root
router that receives from the network, 3) at least one endpoint connected to the
leaf routers that sends to the network, and 4) at least one endpoint connected
to the leaf routers that receives from the network. In practice, it is common to
have all endpoints connected to the root router and leaf routers send to and
receive from the network.

![drawing](./noc/bidirectional_tree.png)

**Figure
Bidirectional_Tree_Topology_Example<a id="bidirectional_tree_topology_example"></a>.
The bidirectional tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example).**

Figure
[Bidirectional_Tree_Topology_Example](#bidirectional_tree_topology_example)
shows the bidirectional tree topology representation of the tree in Figure
[Tree_Topology_Example](#tree_topology_example). All endpoints in the tree send
to and receive from the network.

## Cheat Sheet

*   A [tree](#tree) topology has endpoints connected to the root router and leaf
    routers.
*   [Unidirectional Trees](#unidirectional_tree)
   *    In the [aggregation tree](#aggregation_tree), the communication flow is
        from the leaf routers of the tree to the root router of the tree.
   *    In the [distribution tree](#distribution_tree), the communication flow
        is from the root router of the tree to the leaf routers of the tree.
*   The communication flow of a [bidirectional tree](#bidirectional_tree) is:
    from the root router of the tree to the leaf routers of the tree
    <span style="text-decoration:underline;">and</span> from the leaf routers of
    the tree to the root router of the tree.
